Vaccines are, in most people's minds, lifesaving substances that provide immunity from specific diseases. These vaccines, since their discovery, have saved millions of lives and have been critical to the eradication and reduction of some of the most prolific diseases ever to plague the human race. Some of the most notorious of these diseases include measles, polio and smallpox. The diseases that vaccines were made to prevent were widespread through much of the ancient world and were the source of an endemic fear shared by most people. Humans have waged war on these invisible foes for hundreds of years, ranging from the earliest remedy for diseases, such as variolation, to the race to create the first polio vaccine. Less than a century ago, it would have been commonplace in many countries to see young children with appalling disabilities as a direct result of contracting polio, yet a matter of decades later, this disease, along with many others, are easily preventable through the use of safe and free vaccines.

Over the two and a half centuries since the discovery of vaccines, humanity has advanced and refined their efficacy, safety and distribution. As a result, vaccines are now distributed globally and now every year millions of infants are inoculated against life-threatening diseases. Perhaps the most iconic achievement of these active and effective vaccine programs has been the total eradication of smallpox, a disease once so pervasive it was endemic to much of the globe. To understand the enormity of this achievement and help gain clarity about the valuable role vaccines have played in our lives, it is helpful to explore how the very first vaccines began and discuss the history of vaccine scepticism stemming from their development to the present.

Organisations such as the who (world health organisation) have played a vital role in the success of vaccines and have promoted their support for vaccines across the globe. As a result of these organisations actions, vaccines have become a staple in medical routines across the world. In the changing medical climate of society today however, some individuals have raised concerns for the trust we place in the data we have been fed by these organisations which hold the majority share of the information spread to populations. A prime example of this has been the anti-vaccines movements portrayal of the information we receive from the governments and companies about the safety of vaccines, as i will discuss later in my dissertation. In my dissertation i hope to use sources i, and many others, believe to be trustworthy as it is often a step on which debates crumble; without validated and reliable information, one can not possibly hope to understand a social issue such as the anti-vaccine movement. Moreover, it would be both immoral and dishonest. In this dissertation, i will strive to maintain both the accuracy and the reliability of my data. In order to do this, i will most likely source from world renowned organisations such as the who, the cdc (centre for disease control) and the nhs.

Along with advancements in medicine, the perceptions and approaches to vaccines have also changed dramatically in the past two and a half centuries. The most notable and relevant change in the social understanding and attitudes to vaccines has been in the last half a decade with the expansion of the internet, which has led to a whole new platform for debate and communication. This has primarily contributed to a dramatic progression in the use of vaccines as individuals are now more able to carry out their own research into vaccine efficacy. This, for the most part, greatly benefited the progress of vaccine programs and has improved and strengthened the support for vaccines. On the other hand, there have always been, since vaccines infancy, conflicting views of vaccines regarding their use. Unfortunately, these conflicting views have not reconciled since the early 1800s when vaccines were first made widely available, despite all the research that has gone into disproving these views. The evolution of media has, without doubt, encouraged the fears and concerns individuals have towards vaccines, causing them to be disseminated on a worldwide scale. Furthermore, the evolution of the internet has provided a readily accessible method by which this information can spread and this, in turn, has led to the emergence of the anti-vaccine movement.

In the past year, the anti-vaccine debate has gained more traction, as a result of the alarming repercussions vaccine hesitancy is having on disease rates in parts of the globe. Individuals are now more motivated than ever before to come forward and support their side of the debate as it becomes more polarised. As the divide between the sides has grown, individuals are more able to be more vocalised about the anti-vaccine debate, as a consequence of the ease and anonymity of social media. It is crucial now, more than ever before, to publicise and support vaccines to eliminate and dispel all and any unwarranted apprehensions of vaccines. If we do not dismiss these fears for the general public, it could have very real and tragic consequences, severely impacting vaccination rates across the world. Many people do not have either the time or the resources to do their own thorough research into the safety of vaccines and consequently rely on others to provide their information. If the sources they receive their information from are biased or untrustworthy then they will, no doubt, lack the ability to make an informed decision of whether or not to vaccinate, and this choice potentially puts their lives and all those they come into contact with in danger.

From the outset there is information we must know to fully understand why vaccines have been as successful as they are. Not vaccinating leads to a breakdown in what is known as herd immunity. This is a vital component of a healthy population and acts as a barrier that prevents the spread of disease. By definition, herd immunity is the resistance to the spread of contagious diseases within a population that results if a sufficiently high proportion of individuals are immune to the disease, especially through vaccination.. Essentially, if there are enough vaccinated individuals then the disease will not be able to spread to a new host as, all those the disease comes into contact with are already immune. This keeps incidences of the diseases isolated and is vital for protecting those who cannot be vaccinated, ie. The immunocompromised and the very young.

I believe that we, as a society, have become detached and sheltered from the reality of the severity of the diseases that vaccines have prevented and how grave the effects of abstaining from vaccines genuinely are. The spread of the anti-vaccine movement has raised concern for the future capacity of vaccine programs and therefore, the safety of our children. The world health organisation recently listed vaccine hesitancy as one of the top ten most significant threats to global health. Vaccines have been, without a doubt, pivotal to the existence and success of healthy populations. Without vaccines, the world we live in would continue to be afflicted with many diseases forgotten in today's societies. However, many anti-vaxxers believe this is not the case and that vaccines are doing more harm to society than good. To fully discover how anti-vax views have spread and the impacts they are having on world health i will be asking the question: what are the grounds for the anti-vaccine movement and what part has the media played in its increasing credibility?.

In summary, i hope to:
discuss the early treatments of smallpox and the journey to the creation of the first vaccine.
Explore the resistance these early vaccines faced.
Discover the grounds for the anti-vaccine movement and see how the media has been as an agent of propaganda.
Analyse the impacts and effects of the anti-vaccine movement.
Concluded my question of what are the grounds for the anti-vaccine movement and what part has the media played in its increasing credibility?

History of vaccines
smallpox had been, for a large part of human history, endemic throughout much of the globe, with cases of it being officially recorded as long ago as the ancient egyptian period. It killed indiscriminately from the lowest of society to royalty. It was one of the most common and widespread diseases ever to plague the human race and lasted over 3000 years. During the 18th century, the disease killed an estimated 400,000 europeans each year and, in the 20th century alone, an estimated 300 million people died from smallpox.

Consequently, conquering this disease was the goal of many scientists for hundreds of years. Humans waged war on this all too common foe across time and different cultures using different forms of treatments with varying success. With these exploratory methods of treatment came much controversy and suspicion, not dissimilar to that of the mmr vaccine (measles, mumps and rubella) in recent decades. To fully understand how pivotal vaccines have been in improving public health, i will examine the effects vaccines have had on not only eradicating smallpox but kick-starting a new era of vaccinology. This miracle of vaccine development provides pro-vaccine proponents with an irrefutable and exemplary case for the success vaccines have had and demonstrates how significant is the role that vaccines have in establishing the baseline of healthcare a large amount of the world's population can now access.

Although the origin of smallpox is unknown to medical science, the disease was thought to have been transmitted to humans some 12,000 years ago around the time of the first agricultural settlement in north-eastern africa. The virus itself spreads through person-to-person contact and saliva droplets in an infected persons breath. Once infected, the sufferer may experience symptoms of flu-like fatigue, vomiting, a high fever, mouth sores and blisters that spread the virus into the throat. Furthermore, the most obvious and hideous of all symptoms - and where smallpox gets its name from - were white pus-filled blisters that formed on the face, arms and body. Variola major, the more lethal variant of smallpox, had a mortality rate of approximately 30% and between 6580% of those who survived bore the characteristic smallpox scars, a constant reminder of what they had suffered.

Smallpox was a pure killing machine, and no continent was safe from its grip. It was, despite its virulent and malignant nature, a slow spreading disease. Before the formation of the global transportation network, diseases were reliant on travellers to spread the disease to new corners of the earth. This absence of global transmission meant it could take decades for diseases to become endemic across most parts of the globe. This was the diseases main limitation; it required a host to spread it to others, and its spread was constrained. The development of trade between civilisations enabled its spread. As trade routes developed between europe and asia, merchants unknowingly exported this disease to china, one of the most densely populated regions of the world at the time. Crusaders returning from conquests contracted the disease and carried it back to europe, ignorant of the severity of what they had brought with them. Smallpox had begun its reign.

Treatments of smallpox
smallpox thrived, having spread to every continent on the planet, relatively uncontested by humans. When the first primitive treatments were developed, though there was much to be sceptical about when it came to their safety and efficacy. This scepticism then is similar to that seen today with the contemporary anti-vaccine debate. However, we have undoubtedly come a long way since the creation of early vaccines and our medical knowledge has expanded dramatically. Some of these first treatments included: being bled to the point of fainting, opening smallpox scabs with a golden needle on the seventh day after infection, and drinking a solution of horse faeces. These treatments would, without doubt, seem nonsensical to us today with the knowledge we have gained from hundreds of years of medical research. In realising this, it should make us reconsider whether the fears people had of the early vaccines were just as valid relative to the reliability of the treatments which came before. Many of these treatments posed a greater threat to the lives of patients than leaving the patient untreated. This is an essential realisation people need to make; vaccines are an incredibly vital part of our society that have been researched and scrutinised for over 300 years and there is no evidence to suggest vaccines will not continue to do so to ensure public safety. Our medical establishments must continue to emphasise the fundamental value of vaccines in order to quell suspicions people have and ensure the public's confidence in vaccines.

In 1661 ad in china, the emperor shunzhi lay on his deathbed covered in white pus-filled blisters; he had fallen victim to smallpox. Diseases like smallpox were so devastating that extraordinary steps had to be taken to ensure that these diseases would not threaten the future of the empire: ignoring the succession laws in china at the time, the emperor's closest advisers chose the third son xuanye, who was seven years old at the time, to be his successor. This was most likely because he had already contracted, and survived smallpox so naturally would never contract it again in his lifetime.

Variolation
eventually, scientists realised that, through surviving smallpox, one gained protection and immunity from ever contracting the disease again. This discovery is now apparent to us as the basis of all vaccines and was a significant advancement in the field of vaccines. Moreover, this understanding was the beginning of the end for the smallpox reign as scientists understanding of how to formulate a vaccine evolved from understanding variolation.

The practice of variolation involved immunising a patient by taking material taken from a patient or a recently variolated individual in the hope that a mild, but protective infection would result. And was the first effective treatment for smallpox. In 1022 ad a small book called correct treatment of smallpox, by a buddhist monk living on the sacred mountain o mei shan in the chinese province of sichuan described grinding up the scabs of smallpox victims and blowing them into the noses of healthy people who had not been exposed to smallpox at an earlier age. This worked, however, this remained problematic in that 1% to 2% of those variolated still contracted the disease and died, compared to 30% in those who went untreated.

The understanding of variolation slowly evolved, and by the 1700s, doctors established the frequent use of variolation by applying pus into scratches on the arms of healthy people in order to immunise them against the high chance of contracting smallpox at a later date. In spite of its success, 3% of patients receiving the treatment still contracted smallpox. The use of this treatment eventually made its way to england as word spread of its potential. However, this discovery was not met with open arms because people were suspicious about its eastern asian origins. The first case of variolation in england was recorded in 1721 when lady mary montagu had her daughter, aged two to be, variolated. Lady mary montagu was an english aristocrat, poet and wife to the british ambassador of turkey. She learned of this treatment during a trip to constantinople the previous year after having her son successfully variolated in turkey.

Regardless of the treatments success, she still faced considerable criticism for advocating variolation. In response to the general fear of this inoculation, lady mary, under a pseudonym, published an article advocating for and supporting the treatment. This encouraged public and royal interest. She persuaded caroline of ansbach, wife of king george ii, to trial variolation. Eventually, a trial of variolation was held at newgate prison which came to be known as the royal experiment. Six condemned criminals were told that if they survived variolation, then they would be pardoned and would go free. The ethics of this experiment are unsurprisingly controversial compared to our medical practices today; human testing would be one of the last steps before releasing a new treatment. To see if the method prevented smallpox from recurring, one pardoned female convict was paid to sleep in the same bed as a ten-year-old boy with smallpox for six weeks. Queen caroline then arranged for orphan children in a local parish to be variolated. When these children were also not infected, two of the royal princesses were treated. The variolation trial was seen as a success, and all the prisoners involved were released. Despite the success of the trial, the procedure was still ridiculed and derided by religious establishments. For example, it was argued by the church of england that the practice was both dangerous and sinful, as only god had the power to inflict disease. It was also argued that diseases are sent by god to punish sin and that any attempt to prevent smallpox via inoculation is a "diabolical operation". Despite the religious backlash that this treatment faced, variolation became a relatively conventional approach to protecting people from smallpox. Nevertheless, this treatment was still a long way from the effectivity and safety that vaccines of today possess and it would be many decades before edward jenner pioneered the first true vaccine for smallpox.

Edward jenner
edward jenner is one of the most influential figures in the history of vaccine development and is often described as the father of immunology. Edward jenner earned this title for his enduring research into, and development of, a smallpox vaccine. His discovery cemented smallpoxs eradication and he could be credited with saving millions of lives around the world every year from disease. However, he is often accused of performing immoral and unethical experiments on the journey to making his discoveries.

Edward jenner was an english physician and scientist born in 1749 in gloucestershire, england, to a local vicar. At age 14 he became an apprentice to a surgeon in london. This set him on his path to make a medical breakthrough that would change the world. In 1772 he returned to berkeley, gloucestershire and continued his career as a local doctor.

In 1796, edward jenner noticed that milkmaids who tended cows infected with cowpox often contracted it too. This disease, as opposed to smallpox, was not as harmful. What interested jenner was how milkmaids never seemed to catch the more deadly smallpox. He had a hunch that contracting cowpox provided immunity against smallpox although he did not understand why. To test this theory, he would need a subject who had not contracted either disease. He eventually chose james fitz, aged 8, promising him he could prevent him from ever catching smallpox and that it he would not be harmed in any way. This was merely a hypothesis, and anything could have gone wrong, which is why many now believe what he did was unethical. Although his actions would be deemed immoral and hazardous today, due to the minimal regulations on what was medically legal, his experiment was more or less justified, as it was not common practise to take the care and precautions that modern drug companies do today. Today this sort of research would be unacceptable, which is why drug companies are legally obliged to ensure test subjects fully understand the treatment they are undergoing in a trial and why drugs must be trialled extensively before they can be approved for public use.

To test his theory, jenner took pus from a milkmaids boils and applied it into small cuts on the boys arm. After a few days, james came down with a mild case of cowpox but soon recovered. After six weeks jenner took pus from a smallpox victim and deliberately tried to infect james and yet, despite being in direct contact with the disease, he did not contract it. One of the most significant medical discoveries of all time had been made. Jenner coined the name for this treatment vaccination after the word for cowpox vaccinia. Although jenner had made this discovery, he still had not fully recognised the link between the two diseases which enabled one disease to be used as an inoculation for the other. It would not be until much later that we would have a full understanding about why cowpox provided immunity against smallpox due to the similar antigens shared by the diseases.

The opposition to jenner's work soon became apparent for a variety of reasons. Many doctors of the time rejected the practise of vaccination through fear that it was competition to the treatment of variolation that many of the doctors had founded their careers upon. Through the favoured method of media publication at the time: pamphlets, those opposed to the new jennerian treatment of vaccination had spread fear, vigorously broadcasting their doubt in the safety and efficacy of vaccination. There was, similar to the debate we are experiencing today, dispute over these views, with both sides of the debate employing the use of media to persuade the population. In 1803 members of the royal jennerian society stated: certain opponents of the new practice (jennerian vaccination) have spread an alarm of some terrible calamity, some mysterious change in our very nature and in the propensity of the human race, to be apprehended from the introduction of disease originating from a brute animal. Likewise, in 1803, an anti-vaccine publicist said since the early days of vaccination, neither the vaccine pus, the cowpox, nor the the dirty pus from ulcers of the udder of the gloucestershire cows, preserved people from the most imminent form of smallpox. The opposition which the jenneraian method faced in its infancy was a precursor to the methods used by the anti-vaccine in society today.

Eradication of smallpox
smallpox had been, up until the middle of the industrial revolution, relatively constant in its tenacity. At this point very little was known about how poor hygiene could affect health, until research made by ignaz semmelweis, louis pasteur and other scientists studying microbiology, learned that microbes should be considered a catalyst for the spread of disease. By 1840 britain banned variolation which steamrolled the way for vaccination (the common name for the smallpox vaccine), breaking new ground in medical science. In 1853, the smallpox vaccination was eventually made mandatory for all infants in the first three months of their lives. The government even enforced punishments for parents who did not comply; fines and even prison sentences were used to ensure people vaccinated. These laws were instantly met with resistance from citizens who demanded control over their bodies and their children. The fear the general public had towards vaccines, suggests there had been a lack of access to the persuasive information needed to allay public fear of vaccines safety and efficacy. It is not clear that access to information would have resolved the distrust people have had of the smallpox vaccine. Despite this distrust, the smallpox vaccine program was a success, and by the early 20th century reported smallpox cases were decreasing across the globe. To fully eradicate smallpox, it would need an intense and well-funded program of immunisation across some of the densest areas of smallpox infection.

Five regions of the globe were strongholds for smallpox; south america (primarily brazil), west and central africa, eastern africa, the indian subcontinent and indonesia. This ambitious program of immunisation was first conceptualised at the 1958 world health assembly and was proposed by russia. Nothing of this scale has ever been attempted before on the global health stage and so was entering new territory in which mass immunisation would shape the future of vaccines going forward.

With the support of the world health organisation (who), the usa, which had been tasked with this challenge, began with 23 countries in africa known to have smallpox. Initially, the whos goal was to immunise entire populations in these 23 countries. The scale of this task was glaringly evident as it would require hundreds of millions of vaccines to immunise everyone. Therefore, there was considerable doubt cast upon how efficiently it would be able to inoculate this amount of people. At one point, there were more than 6,800 smallpox outbreaks. It must have seemed nearly impossible to achieve the goal of immunising entire populations. The program was hindered by too few vaccines for people most at risk. As a result, it was necessary to find a more effective way of preventing the spread of the disease. The scientists who had undertaken this challenge of eradicating smallpox eventually stumbled upon a technique called surveillance and containment. In order to save time and vaccines, the approach was to vaccinate within cordons around cases of smallpox in order to contain the spread. This worked better than initially expected causing the virus to be restricted and consequently quarantined.

By 1973, india was the most prominent remaining smallpox stronghold, and scientists began the purging of smallpox from one of the most densely populated countries on earth. By the 1970s india's population approached 550 million people who lived in almost 120 million houses. This posed a clear challenge to the progress of eradicating smallpox as it could have taken years to vaccinate the entire population, yet the program forged ahead. On april 23rd, 1977, two years after the venture into india began, smallpox was declared eradicated. Soon after, the complete eradication of smallpox on all continents was achieved and, in 1980, the world was officially declared smallpox-free.

Organisations such as the who have continued to maintain a vigorous catalogue of major outbreaks of disease to ensure the world's population are safe from the spread of communicable diseases. A serious concern for governmental powers is that, after the eradication of smallpox, regular vaccinations for the disease were stopped across the majority of the world. Therefore, much of the world remain vulnerable to breakouts of this long-forgotten disease. It has been said that three countries still harbour this deadly disease; north korea, russia and iraq. Governments fear that this disease could be used in warfare with devastating effects. If it were to be used in this way, there would be very little to stop it and smallpox could potentially kill thousands, if not hundreds of thousands. This is a problem that closely correlates to the anti-vaccine debate: how vulnerable are populations to recurrences of diseases after immunisation rates decrease? An unvaccinated population is a major threat to our safety. Yet, the anti-vaccine advocates overlook this threat; all it would take is a corrupt and barbaric regime to use a disease such as smallpox to endanger thousands of lives. If we could prevent that, why would we choose not to? Within the anti-vaccine debate, this primarily comes down to complacency and the lack of emphasis on what vaccines have achieved caused by the dissociation we have from the effects of the diseases themselves: our lives have not been directly impacted by diseases like smallpox. In my opinion, this is an abhorrent and naive approach to vaccines that helps to form the passionate distaste i and many others have for parts of the anti-vaccine movement. It is hard for many who are pro-vax, me included, to grasp the fact that anti-vaxxers fail to realise: the real impacts their lies may be having.

Laws of vaccines and regulations
the earliest recorded case of mandatory vaccines dates back to 1777 when george washington, commander-in-chief of the continental army ordered mandatory inoculation for troops if they had not survived a smallpox infection earlier in life. In recent decades governments have contemplated using this same method to counteract the increasing vaccine hesitancy and decreasing vaccination rates as seen in certain parts of the world.

As of 2018, parents in france were legally obliged to vaccinate their children in order to uphold herd immunity and maintain a standard for public health. This followed a similar initiative in italy which recently banned unvaccinated children from going to school. In the uk, there is no legal obligation to vaccinate children which, without doubt, has facilitated the descending child vaccination rates. Many people, both for and against vaccines, believe this freedom to choose whether to be vaccinated or not is a human liberty and should be made a constitutional right. In the usa, state representative briscoe cain of texas even went as far as saying: i believe that, in the hierarchy of rights, liberty is higher than safety and security, a passion felt by many groups of people who feel the ability to make their own decisions about healthcare is paramount. This heightened emotion is something we must take into account when understanding why people are anti-vaccine; we must realise if we understand that they are doing what they think is the best thing for their children. Albeit an extreme example, this attitude to the use of vaccines demonstrates another side of the anti-vaccine debate that needs to be deciphered. Should it not be expected that parents would be cautious of vaccines administered to their children? What rights do parents have to claim non-medical exemptions from vaccines, potentially putting their child and others in danger? To gain a full picture of how appropriate our approach to vaccines is, it is essential to explore how and why governments are taking a stance on this highly polarised debate. This understanding may enable us to recognise why many in the anti-vaccine movement feel that the government shows a prejudiced attitude to individual human rights and that individuals are being punished for doing what they believe is right.

The us is currently at the forefront of the debate for the anti-vaccine movement and provides an ideal example of how issues vary between states depending on the laws relating to vaccines. All 50 states of america mandate immunisations for children in order to enrol in public school, but various exemptions are permitted depending on the state. Regulations and recommendations are made by the advisory committee on immunization practices which is part of the centres for disease control and prevention (cdc). Additionally, all states allow exemptions for people who have medical conditions and contraindications to vaccines and all states except for california, west virginia, and mississippi allow religious exemptions. Eighteen states allow parents to cite personal, conscientious and philosophical objections. This could be seen as a positive thing; giving parents the right to make their own decisions on the safety of vaccines, except this is, without question, putting lives at risk. With increasing numbers of parents choosing this method of exemption, it has led to a decrease in herd immunity within communities of low vaccination rates and hence, an increasing number of disease outbreaks. The american academy of paediatrics (aap) advises physicians to respect the refusal of parents to vaccinate their children after adequate discussion. This does not stop, however, institutions such as schools barring the access to education if the child is not fully vaccinated.

The anti-vaccine movement
whoever controls the media, controls the mind. - jim morrison

the media has been a driving force in the anti-vaccine debate and has served as a playground for many polarised views and opinions that heavily influence the way people view specific issues in society. It is a powerhouse behind public opinion and can manipulate, influence and pressurise society. Media has, without doubt, provided the anti-vaccine debate with a platform for the increasing public attention the movement has received in the past three decades. As a consequence, we have seen the media play a huge role in providing the public with access to the information needed to make responsible decisions about vaccination. This has led me to ask the question, how has the media impacted the vaccine debate?

Court orders rape of a child. Think this is an exaggeration? Think again. This is assault without consent and with full penetration too. If we as a society allow this crime to take place, we are every bit as guilty as the judge who made the order and the doctor who carries it out. If anyone knows this family, please put them in touch with me.

The extremist position expressed in this quotation is a symbol of the manufactured fear and social anxiety that medical establishments have so fiercely fought off over the past 300 years. To compare vaccines to something as physically and psychologically damaging as rape is exceptionally insensitive and utterly misguided. This is a perfect example of the exaggeration and fabrication tactics that the anti-vaccine movement uses to intimidate and frighten vulnerable parents into making reactionary and biased decisions. My strong disbelief in the claims made by anti-vaccine opinions is shared by many across the world. However, it is imperative to realise that not all anti-vaxxers are as radically opposed to vaccines as the author of this quote. Many people are merely confused and conflicted about the information they are receiving from both sides of the debate and have therefore decided to avoid deciding at all. This is an utterly unfortunate and risky decision about something that is, after all, safe and free for all children.

The stance on vaccines in this quote demonstrates one of the most common themes within the views of anti-vaxxers: there is a severe distrust in both the safety of vaccines and the establishments that back them. Many believe that vaccines are an agent of death designed to reduce population growth. In a way, this is true, bill gates, a recognised supporter of vaccines, has virtuously suggested that vaccines have slowed population growth. Contrary to the anti-vaccine media sources, however, he stated that this has been a positive impact of vaccines. Fewer children are needing to be born as more are making it to adulthood due to improved hygiene and vaccines. Therefore, families can better provide for the children they have with increasing standards of living. Antithetically, this suggests quite the opposite of what the anti-vaccine movement has promoted.

Others along the anti-vaxx spectrum believe that the natural way is the best way. They might suggest things like essential oils, probiotics and other natural paths to bolster immunity. Although proven to be healthy, these alternatives do not have anything in common with vaccines. For example, certain essential oils are known to stimulate various smell receptors and may induce states of calm and relaxation. Vaccines, on the other hand, stimulate various cells of the immune system to provide antibodies against various viral infections. Others believe that relying solely on breast milk provides their child with all the antibodies an infant requires to defend against diseases. However, as is common knowledge within the medical community, after the birth of a child the maternal antibodies wane in the first 6-12 months and therefore do not provide protection after that point leaving the child defenceless against disease. It is difficult to detangle how these parents believe the lies being told them, based on the factual information they have at their disposal. It is yet again another example of the way the anti-vaccine movement has manifested and exerted its power via the online domain to persuade scores of people not to vaccinate. They attempt to ensure vaccine-hesitant parents centralise their research around the views of anti-vaxxers and disparage the information presenting how unwarranted their fears genuinely are. As the vaccine hesitant parents continue to discover more and more claims of the damaging impacts of vaccines, this will only reinforce the preconceived concerns they have.

The current fear of vaccines could, in my view, finds its roots in a significant medical failure of the early 1960s: the thalidomide catastrophe. This was one of the darkest moments in pharmaceutical research history. In the 1950s a german company, chemie grunenthal gmbh, developed a new drug called thalidomide, an anticonvulsive drug with side effects which included making its users sleepy. It was realised during preclinical testing that it was nearly impossible to achieve a deadly overdose. However, the results of using the drug on pregnant subjects during the animal testing phase, which was a routine analysis in clinical pretesting of drugs, was missed. The apparently harmless thalidomide was licensed in july of 1956 and was released as a prescription-free over-the-counter product in germany and most other european countries. The drug was touted as a remedy to reduce morning sickness and so began its use by pregnant women.

After a few years, scientists began to question the safety of the drug and concerningly it was found that, when tested on pregnant rabbits, the babies had long term deformities on their limbs, most likely as a result of thalidomide. Soon it was realised that the worst fears had come true: it was discovered that over 10,000 children had been born with birth deformities as a direct result of their mothers' use of thalidomide during pregnancy. Soon after this was discovered the drug was taken off the market in 1961.

Although the thalidomide catastrophe stems from a different sector of medicine, there are close links to points raised by the anti-vaccine movement; significant errors in judgement which led to severe outcomes felt across many parts of the uk, the us and many other countries. Who is to say that something of this severity could not happen again? Undoubtedly, medical research has advanced massively in the past few decades as seen by the production of multiple new vaccines such as the mmr vaccine, the hib vaccine (haemophilus influenzae) and the pneumococcal vaccine. The hib and pneumococcal vaccine alone are estimated to have saved 1.45 million children from death since 2000. For this reason, we can be more confident in the safety of vaccines than ever before. The thalidomide case provides real-life insight into the fear ridden mindset of a vaccine-hesitant parent. The core focus, as a parent, should be the safety of their children. Is that so wrong? Perhaps, we need to show more empathy those have who make the decision not to vaccinate their children as this may help in further understanding the root of their fears.

Over the past half-decade, we have seen tremendous growth and change in the platforms of media we use to communicate and compare information. In turn, the media has also begun to change the way many people see vaccines. For this reason, it is critical that the general public have access to the most reliable information and reduce their intake of fake news that tends to misdirect emotions and feelings towards vaccines. It is both dangerous and naive to allow populations to judge something as integral for a healthy population as vaccines, off information they cannot possibly form an accurate opinion of vaccines from. The number of social media users worldwide in 2019 has increased by 9% year-on-year, to a total of 3.484 billion. As almost half of the world's entire population has access to some form of social media, it is in a strong position to shape the social stance on the attitudes to vaccines. It is crucial that governments, pharmaceutical companies and media companies should maintain and regulate news and information that threatens the progression of vaccine programs.

A recent example of an action being taken to prevent fake news being used by the anti-vaccine movement as a tool of manipulation involved youtube placing sanctions on channels relating to anti-vaccine conspiracy theories, which have been identified as harmful to the public health by youtube. All advertisement campaigns were halted on these channels meaning the revenue stream of these channels are stopped, therefore discouraging the production of more content. One of the channels affected was vaxxed tv, the youtube channel and organisation behind vaxxed: from cover-up to catastrophe. This documentary, directed by andrew wakefield, made attempts to link autism with vaccines. It seems absurd that wakefield is still, more than 20 years after the release of his initial study, advancing a link between the mmr-vaccine and autism which has now been thoroughly debunked. I will discuss this further in the mmr scandal section.

The channel itself is alarming; it comprises over 1000+ video interviews of people claiming damage by vaccines. The channel appears somewhat melancholic, depicting raw emotional anguish and pain of those allegedly affected. It is difficult not to feel sorrow for those interviewed: these parents, relatives, brothers and sisters, all seeking answers for diseases/disorders such as autism their children have. Their distress is plain to see and hear in their stories. These accounts, all run along a similar theme, are used to trigger sympathy in viewers and persuade others to take their view. Potentially, this could mislead more victims down a route of emotion on decision making over evidence and encourage others to blame vaccines for diseases and symptoms unrelated to the vaccination itself. This strategy is a flagrant abuse of the vulnerability that many viewers hold and many may fail to realise it. In my opinion, the consequences are so serious that it warrants the sanctions it has received through the removal of advertisements. These channels have a massive hold over their audience and have successfully indoctrinated scores into the anti-vaccine movement.

Both medical and media companies have started to realise the harmful impacts this is having on the rates of vaccination and are striking back against these organisations at the forefront of the anti-vaccine movement. However, this does not diminish the importance of individuals who believe they or a loved one has been harmed by vaccines. In turn, they may not realise or acknowledge the dire consequences that their broad reach has in every part of the world across social media, and must, therefore, hold some responsibility for the repercussions of their actions. There is a powerful rationale for social media companies to mediate information and place sanctions on these inflammatory organisations when public health and safety is at risk. Anti-vaxx organisations are responsible for encouraging vaccine hesitancy across many parts of the world once known for high levels of vaccination and lower rates of disease. One study, renowned for its baseless and inflammatory claim is the mmr (measles, mumps, rubella) scandal. Many recognise this scandal as the beginning of a new age of controversy.

Mmr scandal
since 1988, when the mmr vaccine was created, over 500 million doses have been distributed in more than 100 countries, as at 2001. In the uk since 2006, only two children have died from measles and 42 out of 53 european countries have now achieved elimination status. The reason for this achievement is clear; an effective and active vaccine program that has reasonably maintained its scope and tenacity despite times of uncertainty. However, this view is not shared by a growing segment of the population demonstrated by the increasing exemptions being made by parents for the mmr vaccine. The uncertainties and worries underlying these choices were exacerbated by the extreme view of vaccines advanced in 1998 by andrew wakefield, an english gastroenterologist , until he was struck off the uk medical register for unethical behaviour, misconduct and dishonesty.

It all began with a flawed study written by wakefield who linked the mmr vaccine to behavioural regression and pervasive developmental disorders in children, such as autism. The data in this study was unsound in multiple ways: the experiment was held with a sample size of a mere 12 children and conclusions to the experiment varied. For the medical research data to be in any way revealing and reliable, the sample size for an experiment would have to be much larger to represent a population adequately. Furthermore, the children were not chosen for this study randomly according to research standards, instead those who best fit the hypothesis that vaccines caused autism and other behavioural regression and pervasive developmental disorders in children were cherry-picked. It was found that of the 12 children selected in the experiment, not a single one was from london where the experiment was based and that one child came from as far away as northern california. It later established that wakefield had been hired two years before the study by a firm of lawyers to make these allegations expressly. This information clearly demonstrates that this study had scandalous intent and despite the legitimacy of the study being debunked, many people still believe wakefield's claims and continue to support the anti-vaccine movement, choosing not to vaccinate their children. A tenet of society today is the freedom to express our beliefs. This, for the most part, has been an emancipating and progressive requirement for individuals to make healthcare choices, although problematically it has also presented vaccination programs with potential barriers significantly impairing the coverage of vaccines. Despite the limited scientific backing to wakefield's study, his research received a high quantity of publicity and soon became a symbol in the anti-vaccine movement. The damage was already done, and impacts were soon seen as mmr vaccination rates decreased.

Wakefield's study profoundly damaged the public confidence in vaccines for many years and provided an insight into how the public can interpret even the most unreliable studies in a negative light. In my opinion, this mass misinterpretation led to thousands of individuals having an inability to make clear and justified decisions based on a wide range of information accessible to them. In making a rash decision, they put theirs and the lives of others in danger. I think that it is important not to overlook all possible outcomes of the use of vaccines, as it is easy to dismiss anti-vaccine theories but, in the future, we may, although unlikely, regret ignoring these views. At this stage, however, i firmly believe in the safety and effectiveness of current vaccines and also that anti-vaxxers are misguided in their views, possibly as a result of the coercion of the media; many of their proposals and ideas are illogical and challenging to comprehend.

Even though wakefields claims were disproved by multiple sources, including the who and the nhs, there was no stopping the inevitable firestorm that followed in its wake. On the contrary, the false claims that mmr vaccines were causing autism led to outcry from the anti-vaccine community but also people's fears about the safety of the mmr vaccines also caused them to question the safety of all vaccines.
Unrest in pakistan
pakistan is one of the only countries, along with afghanistan and nigeria, still classified in 2019 as having wild polio endemic in certain regions. This could be largely attributed to social unrest and mistrust of vaccines. Pakistan was previously on track to be declared polio free; it had reduced annual cases from 22,000 in 1994 to fewer than 100 in 2015 onwards. However, this progress made over two decades is now being undermined by the spread of fake information and decade-long suspicion created by those who oppose the polio vaccine.

In pakistan, there is a clear divide on the stance to vaccines; many, including the authorities, are in full support of the use of the polio vaccine, but there are also those opposed to the vaccine for the fear they lead to infertility and are a western conspiracy to get rid of muslims. This is an opinion the government has struggled to combat on many occasions. The pakistani government has used mass vaccination programs to prevent the transmission of polio. These programs were, however, met with some resistance from the general public and has on occasion resulted in small conflicts, leading to the death of healthcare workers.

A vital part of promoting the support for vaccines is educating people on their benefits and the positive impact they are having, as, if they do not emphasise this then, those opposed to vaccines have the ability to promote fake and damaging information. This fake information further stirs the mistrust for the vaccines and the establishments that back them. This is a major issue in parts of pakistan. In one school in pakistan, after a mass vaccination funded and enforced by the local government, the headmaster called some parents to inform them that some of their children had fainted and vomited, and had been sent to hospital. By the time that it was realised that these claims were lies, it was too late and word had spread via social media, leading to mass panic within the local communities. Furious parents then gathered round the local government health facility and destroyed its boundaries. The majority of these events were streamed live on local tv which caused more confusion and fear.

These events in pakistan gained global attention and the who expressed its grave concern for the countrys battle with polio. It is clear that the pakistani government must do more to convince their population of the safety of the polio vaccine and must continue to actively combat the mass hysteria.

The power of influencers
a common tactic used by both sides of the vaccine debate is to form alliances with people in positions of power to sway public opinion. People are often drawn to high-profile role models to help form opinions and many people are overly influenced by fame, celebrities or simply the trust they place in the representatives they elect or people who speak from a position which is regarded as authoritative. How accountable should these influential people be for the impact of what they say if it causes people to make risky and unsafe choices especially for children? In recent years the differentiation between reliable and unreliable information has become harder to see for individuals who are vaccine-hesitant.

As president of the usa, donald trump is probably one of the most influential people in our world today and has the power to manipulate people's beliefs on a worldwide scale. His position as president might lead anyone to believe that he is a reliable source of information on a topic as fundamental to public health as the anti-vaccine debate. He has claimed that he is in favour of vaccines, yet he has made numerous inflammatory and brash comments about the safety of vaccines adding fuel to the fire of the anti-vaccine debate. During the cnn gop debate in september 2015, when asked whether he believed vaccines cause autism he responded:

"i am totally in favour of vaccines. But i want smaller doses over a longer period of time. The same exact amount, but you take this little beautiful baby, and you pump--i mean, it looks just like it's meant for a horse, not for a child, and we've had so many instances, people that work for me. ... [in which] a child, a beautiful child, went to have the vaccine and came back and a week later had a tremendous fever, got very, very sick, now is autistic. "

as thought-provoking as this comment by trump is, it is one of many he has made about vaccine safety. The risk lies in his influential position in questioning the safety of vaccines. If he believes vaccines are unsafe should others too? He tries to trigger parents emotionally by bringing innocence and vulnerability into the conversation: you take this little beautiful baby, and you pump. His emotionally manipulative language might sow the seed of doubt in the minds of parents deciding whether to vaccinate their children, resulting in dangerous consequences. The quote clearly shows his naive understanding of vaccines. Despite trump stating he was totally in favour of vaccines, that assertion is negated by the controversial claims he makes in the remainder of the quote. Human nature tends to focus more on what is negative about a situation [negativity bias] than the positives.

When trump stated i want smaller doses over a longer period of time, anyone with even limited knowledge of vaccines would realise that vaccine overdoses are rare and when they do occur are often due to human error not to specifications given by the drug companies who develop vaccines. Even some of trumps own scientific advisers disagree with his views of vaccines, and yet he perpetuates his stubborn and irresponsible actions, supporting this questionable pseudoscience.

What are the effects of the anti-vaccine movement?
Over the last century, progress in the field of vaccinology has been extensive, finding vaccines for diseases that once plagued much of the world. One might perceive that with these developments, diseases such as polio and measles are distant trivial issues of the past. However, for much of the world, this is not the case. At the time of writing, authorities in the philippines have declared an outbreak of the highly contagious measles virus. Between the 1st of january and the 7th march 2019, there had been a concerning 18,553 cases of measles including 286 deaths. The department of health undersecretary, eric domingo, largely accredits the low number of measles vaccinations in the country to the aborted dengvaxia vaccination program. Astoundingly, according to the department of health, the number of unvaccinated children had risen by over 100,000 in the last year to a total of almost 2.4 million. This demonstrates a catastrophic negligence of the filipino government and indeed shows the extent of the alarming impacts low vaccination rates can have. Unvaccinated populations are vulnerable. This is what the anti-vaccine movement puts society at risk of. They are, ultimately, facilitating a pathway for diseases to reach infection levels seen long before vaccines.
For many, the philippines outbreak may seem a distant reality. However, in the westernised world where most people have better access to healthcare, a state of emergency was recently declared in washington state, usa, where 49 cases of measles have been confirmed, 41 of which were non-immunised individuals. This is what too many people fail to realise; that refusing to vaccinate has consequences closer to their home than many realise. This coincides with increasing unvaccinated populations within some areas of the us. The state of oregon, in recent years has faced a rapid growth in numbers of parents not vaccinating their children, facilitated by the relatively relaxed laws on non-medical exemptions.

This graph, from the source, clearly illustrates the dangerous course that oregon state is heading towards; a future of a vulnerable and unprotected population. If the refusal to vaccinate continues to increase at the current rate it will pose a huge risk for not only the lives of those not vaccinated but also those who cannot be vaccinated.

Vaccine hesitancy
vaccine hesitancy refers to delay in acceptance or refusal of vaccines despite the availability of vaccination services.
Vaccine hesitancy is, in my view, a rather misunderstood and misinterpreted term. By definition, it is the delay in acceptance or refusal of vaccines and does not necessarily indicate the complete refusal of vaccines in the way extreme anti-vaxxers might. In the majority of cases, these views fall under one of four categories: the desire for additional education, safety concerns, personal/philosophical or religious reasons. I believe that governments need to rethink the rationale for some of these exemptions. It is my position that governments need to do more to prevent the spread of misinformation espoused by the anti-vaccine debate. This is partly why i believe that the controversy brought about by the mmr scandal is, in some ways, a positive thing: it has encouraged governments and organisations to do more to increase public knowledge of data-based information on vaccines, which is needed to make a full and justified decision on whether to vaccinate.

As soon as a child is born, parents are encouraged to vaccinate their children. In the uk within the first weeks of life, with parental consent, a baby will receive a substantial number of vaccines. The first vaccine is a six-in-one vaccine that prevents diphtheria, whooping cough, tetanus, polio, hib and hepatitis b. The way these initial vaccines are presented to parents is of vital importance for the future health of their child. In the uk, the vast majority of parents will choose to vaccinate their children. However, uptake of the vital mmr vaccine, offered to all babies when they turn one year old, has consistently had lower rates than most other commonly used vaccines with only 91.2% of parents vaccinating in england in 2017-18, down from 91.6% in 2016-17 and the lowest level since 2011-12. Many doctors accredit this drop in vaccination rates to an increase in vaccine hesitancy across parts of the uk as a result of the wakefield-mmr scandal. This has put many thousands of people at risk of contracting these diseases. These diseases have seen, in the past couple of years, a surge in cases, and this should not be taken lightly.

Recently, there has been a major outbreak of mumps, one of the diseases covered by the mmr vaccine, at both nottingham trent university and the university of nottingham. A total of 241 suspected cases were reported, 51 of which were confirmed between the two universities. Along with many scientists, i believe this is fallout from andrew wakefields mmr controversy. During the period after the study was released, vaccination rates dipped. In 2003 the mmr vaccine rates were the lowest they had been for more than a decade, reaching a mere 79.9% of babies across the uk. Those children that were not vaccinated after the mmr-autism scare are now beginning to reach the age where they are going into higher education and putting others at risk. This, without doubt, is one of the reasons we have seen increased cases of diseases such as mumps.

In the pursuit of healthy children, these vaccine-hesitant parents have, unbeknownst to them, caused outbreaks of mumps. It is crucial for parents to understand the impacts their decisions could have so that they can make conscious and educated choices about whether to vaccinate or not. In eliminating the spread of fake information, there could be a domino effect on the entire debate; parents will not be persuaded by these fabricated stories of vaccine damage and will have better access to more coherent information on the safety of vaccines without having to identify and decipher what is real and what is fake news.

Out of the worrying ramifications in the anti-vaccine debate, there is at least something of a consolation, the debate has brought together a range of people to take a stand against the anti-vaccine movement and encourage governments to do more to prevent vaccine hesitancy in the future. People are beginning to rally in a move to ensure the safety of vaccines future and the safety of their children. There have been calls recently to require governments to make information on vaccines more accessible for the public and to require more regulations and transparency of drug companies. I hope that we, as a society, are starting to realise the impact vaccine hesitancy is having and we push towards a future where parents have access to the critical information to make the correct decision for their children. However, i think it is important that we do not demonise parents who do not decide to vaccinate their children and instead unite and strive to find a solution to the problem of vaccine hesitancy.

Conclusion / what are the grounds for the anti-vaccine movement and what part has the media played in its increasing credibility?
Since the conception of the first vaccines, their sole purpose has been to reduce deaths from communicable diseases such as smallpox and polio. One cannot exaggerate the positive impact vaccines have had. With the exception of access to safe water, no other medical achievement, including the discovery of antibiotics, has had such a radical contribution on mortality reduction and population growth. It is undeniable that vaccines have saved millions of lives and are seen by many individuals, from a range of backgrounds, as a modern miracle. However, i believe vaccines have, perhaps, been victims of their own success. In our time we have not had to see the devastating effects diseases like smallpox have had on the lives of millions. We have not had to live in fear that a sore throat or skin lesions could spell our doom. We can live in peace that our children can go to school safe from serious disease. Why? Vaccines.

In writing this dissertation, i have discovered the belligerence and ignorance in attitude with which parts of the anti-vaccine movement conduct the war on vaccines. It is difficult to comprehend the stubbornness in which the anti-vaccine movement goes about its propaganda; they disparage vaccines and make absurd claims about vaccines, reinforcing their views with ludicrous pseudoscience from non-fact based sources. The opinions they have of vaccines have spread like a virus to some of the more vulnerable in our societies; parents merely want what is best for their children. This targeted propaganda is psychological warfare on a very large scale. The manipulative nature of the anti-vaccine proponents is made worse by the way anti-vax media catastrophizes distorted stories of vaccine impact. Thankfully, the pro-vaccine community has pulled together to ensure that our children continue to be protected by countering fake news that has led to the concerning breakouts we are starting to see in countries across the globe with facts.

The shadow that has been cast over vaccines in the last few decades, with the emergence of the anti-vaccine movement in modern day society, is shameful. The legitimacy of this tremendous discovery that has saved millions of lives has begun to be eroded by an emotionally charged movement which uses fictitious data designed to alarm and shock. It is hard to fathom how anyone does not realise the central role vaccines play in our lives. The conduct of the anti-vaccine movement is, in my opinion, immoral. The anti-vaccine movement fails to acknowledge the clear data-based information, easily accessible with minimal searching from reliable sources, about the safety of vaccines, and instead claim the public too, is blind to the facts. The hypocrisy frustrates me and many other individuals, scientists included, because the stakes are simply too great.

The debate over vaccines has created a confusing environment for all. Confusion has most definitely contributed to the vaccine hesitancy we are beginning to see on the increase across the world. Perhaps it is our approach to vaccines that needs to change, we need to focus more on why anti-vaxxers believe what they do as opposed to what. The media and polarised public figures have influenced the anti-vaccine debate on an enormous scale and more attention needs to be drawn to this because of the reliance people have on these sources on which they base potentially life changing decisions. The pro-vaccine movement must stay vigilant; the scale of the spread of misinformation must be revealed and debunked to bolster the public confidence in vaccines.

Despite the incredible success of vaccines, their acceptance has been threatened by the mmr scandal and other attacks on vaccine use. We need to be more proactive than ever before to fully understand how best to quell fears and eroded public confidence. We must find a compromise that enables us to be able to provide parents with the means to make their individual decisions but also to keep an eye open to other opinions to aid us in further understanding the efficacy of vaccines. The approach the anti-vaccine movement takes to vaccines also must change drastically in one way or another from its current state to provide the clarity that is needed to get their points across. If we can avoid the argumentative and childish nature that has infected the anti-vaccine debate and work together for the mutual goal of better public health, it will be invaluable for the future progress of vaccines and the safety of our children.